>>REGINA MEREDITH: One of the
fastest disappearing practices
in Western culture is sleep,
so sweet yet so far away
for so many people.
But what is this
doing to our lives?
What actually happens
when we sleep?
From crossing between worlds
to restoring our immune systems
and neural networks,
sleep is one
of the most important
practices of being human.
Kat Duff loves to sleep and
began a years-long project
to document what
happens when we sleep,
which became the basis of
her book "The Secret Life
of Sleep."
And Kat's here with us today.
You love to sleep?
>>KAT DUFF: I do, Regina.
>>REGINA: Tell me when
you became just fascinated
with the subject of sleep.
>>DUFF: You know, I'd loved to
sleep when I was a little girl.
It was my favorite time of day.
I loved going in my
room, shutting the door,
turning off the
light, and it felt
like it was a huge world that
I got to go to in my sleep.
And then in the
morning, waking up.
OK, I've got to do this life.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>DUFF: And I
always wondered, how
is it that sleep changes me?
Because I would notice
that I'd feel changed.
I'd wake up in a
better mood usually.
I'd wake up remembering
things for the tests better
than when I has
studied the day before.
Sometimes I would wake up
with a different feeling
about a situation than
I'd had the night before.
Something that had been
really upsetting the night
before suddenly
wasn't so upsetting.
It seemed like, oh,
I can deal with that.
>>REGINA: Mm hmm.
And you're lucky,
because there are
people who go to sleep at night
and dread the experience--
>>DUFF: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: --who have night
terrors and horrid dreams
and so forth.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And
we're going to talk
about all the guises of
sleep and what it looks like
and how different
people experience it.
And one of things I wanted
to start off with here,
because it's really
a shame that it's
such a common
phrase among people
in the Western world, which
is you snooze, you lose.
And so this is bringing about
a mindset for many people
that, oh, god, I wish
I didn't have to sleep.
Sleep is such a waste of time.
I wish I could get by
on three or four hours.
Well, a lot of people actually
are getting by on three or four
hours because they can't sleep.
But what is that doing
to us as a culture,
this you snooze, you lose?
>>DUFF: You snooze,
you lose, I take it
back to Ben Franklin,
who used to say
that we sleep
enough in the grave.
That Western and
especially American
tradition of that
Protestant work ethic
that says sleep is
a waste of time,
we've got better
things to do, one
of the most difficult things
about that, of course,
is that we don't
function as well when
we aren't getting enough sleep.
We're more likely to
focus on the negative.
We're more likely to create
conflicts, to be aggressive,
to be unwilling to
resolve conflicts.
We have a harder time
remembering things.
We have poor judgment.
We take risks we shouldn't take.
That kind of sums up our
culture in some ways.
>>REGINA: It does
in a lot of ways.
It creates also a
lack of patience
and sometimes irresponsible
behaviors and such.
Poor judgment.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Poor judgement.
>>DUFF: There are some people,
a very small percentage
of the population, that is
actually genetically inclined
to get by on three or
four hours of sleep.
But a lot more
people try to do it
than can actually
get away with it.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DUFF: And one of
the first things
we lose when we're
sleep deprived
is our ability to reflect
on our own behavior.
So when someone tells me I
do just fine on three or four
hours, I like to go to their
family members and ask them--
>>REGINA: Yeah,
how are they doing?
>>DUFF: --how patient are they?
Or to their coworkers.
Are they making many mistakes?
That kind of thing.
Because we don't realize when
we are not functioning as well.
>>REGINA: Right.
That becomes our reality.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
>>REGINA: So I noticed when
I was in India, for example,
such a completely
different idea about sleep.
At first, it was
kind of shocking,
in that I saw people
sleeping kind of everywhere,
on the side of the road.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
>>REGINA: I remember
walking into a cafe,
and I walked around the uncle
who was sleeping on the floor
next to a plate of tomatoes
that had been cooked
and were settling down, the
juices were settling down,
a big plate.
And he was just passed out
next to them on the floor,
and you just walked
around the uncle
and went on about your business.
And sleep is really not
anything to be ashamed of
but should be done whenever
you're inspired to do so.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
Yeah.
I was really interested in
the historical perspectives
on sleep and
cross-cultural ones.
We have really, in our
westernized cultures,
really privatized sleep
in the modern age.
Now before the Industrial
Age, before the advent
of artificial light, people
slept more communally.
They often slept twice
a day or twice a night.
But now we have
this habit where we
think that we have to
go off by ourselves
and have very special
conditions to sleep in.
>>REGINA: And do it
in one concentrated--
>>DUFF: In one spell.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>DUFF: Right.
>>REGINA: Mm hmm.
No.
OK.
So now a little bit
about your background.
You were involved for many years
in the study of neuroscience
and neurofeedback.
>>DUFF: Mm hmm.
>>REGINA: And I'm
going to bring up
the subject of Eugene Asbrinsky.
I think that's how you--
>>DUFF: Oh, yes.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And let's talk about how your
background in neurofeedback
fed into the research and
understanding of sleep.
>>DUFF: I'd actually started
studying neurosciences
long before that, before
the neurofeedback, actually,
with the-- I worked with
a lot of trauma survivors.
And of course there's a
very neurological component
to post-traumatic stress.
So I started studying that then.
And also, as a
counselor we learn a lot
about neurological
development in infancy
and the conditions
of infancy that
create later states of mind.
But then about 10 years
ago I got interested
in neurofeedback, so I continued
that study of neurosciences.
And the relationship between
what's going on neurologically
and how we think and how we feel
is really a fascinating one.
And one of the things I learned
as a neurofeedback therapist
especially is that no matter
what problem someone walks
in the door with, if we
can help them sleep better,
usually that problem
gets better--
>>REGINA: Interesting.
So simple.
>>DUFF: --whether it's
depression, anxiety,
impulse control, all of those.
So I very quickly learned
to put into my intake,
how do you sleep?
Tell me about your sleep.
How long do you sleep?
How do you fall asleep?
Those kinds of things are
very important to consider
in terms of our mental
and emotional well-being.
>>REGINA: And then we
all know as time went on,
starting in 1953 with Asbrinsky?
>>DUFF: Aserinsky, yes.
>>REGINA: Aserinsky?
>>DUFF: Mm hmm.
>>REGINA: OK.
That's when we began
observing sleep.
And then over time sleep
labs started up and such.
Can you talk about
what that phenomena
brought to our awareness?
>>DUFF: Yes.
We're talking about in the
Western scientific tradition.
Until the development of our
brain imaging techniques,
scientists in the West
assumed that nothing happened
when we sleep, that our brains
were like the lamp next to us
that we turn off
when we go to sleep
and we turn it back
on when we wake up.
But then with the development
of the electroencephalogram
we began to be able
to record brain waves.
And what Aserinsky did, he
brought his eight-year-old son
into the sleep lab
and hooked him up
and was watching
his brain waves.
And his son fell asleep
and started dreaming,
and his eyes were flickering
around underneath their lids.
And that's when he realized--
The brain waves all
got really intense.
And that's when he
realized, that he
made the connection between
sleep and brain wave
activity and dreaming
and brain wave activity.
That put an end to the
notion that nothing
happens while we sleep.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about
Threshold Consciousness.
You talk about that in the book.
What is Threshold Consciousness?
>>DUFF: Well, we like
to think that we're
either awake or asleep and
there's no realm in between.
But in fact what I've called
Threshold Consciousness
is a blending of the two.
And neurological research has
confirmed that our brains just
don't shut down all at
once like a light bulb.
Different parts of
our brain, once they
get tired-- for
example, if we've
been reading for a long time,
the parts of our brain we use
when we're reading--
will, in a sense,
kind of close down for the
day before other parts.
And so we have these mixed
states of part awake,
part asleep that manifests
in many different ways.
It can manifest as sleepwalking.
It can manifest as
sleep paralysis.
It can manifest
as creative ideas.
A lot of artists have mined
those threshold states
for inspiration.
>>REGINA: Yes.
In fact, in a moment
we'll take a look
at what that looks
like, sleepwalking.
It's a funny little video that
a man's family took of him,
and he's with his
little daughter.
But first, before we go
to that video in a sec,
I wanted to talk about
that a little more,
because that threshold area is
also where a lot of information
flows through for people
that tend to pay attention
to intuitive impulses and such.
And in your book,
you talked about how
Nabokov, the author of
"Lolita" and other books,
received a lot of
his information
as he was drifting in
that between space.
>>DUFF: Well, a lot of artists
have and a lot of writers,
absolutely.
I think it was
Steinbeck who coined
the phrase Committee of Sleep.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>DUFF: I'll let my Committee
of Sleep work on this,
and I'll have an idea in
the morning of what to do.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>DUFF: It's very common.
I like to take my problems, both
in writing as well as my life
problems, to my sleep.
And that's why I really
cherish those times
of falling asleep and
waking up, because that's
when we can kind of access
the larger realms of awareness
that we come to in sleep that
are hard to sometimes bring up
to conscious awareness.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And I notice in my own life I
have these very weird things
that happen if I'm particularly
tired, for example.
You know how you've
been going, going?
You're very tired.
In those states, when I start
drifting into the sleep process
but I'm not there yet,
I'm still conscious,
I see full-on animated cartoons.
And I watch bizarre cartoons
and think, what is up?
Or sometimes see
almost a negative world
of shadows of real
people, and I almost
feel like an eavesdropper.
I'm watching them.
I'm listening to
their conversations.
And it's usually
rather innocuous.
It's just kind of dropping
into someone else's reality.
I don't know what
dimension or whatnot,
but I've always found it so
amazing what the being will
choose to show to itself--
>>DUFF: Isn't it?
I know.
>>REGINA: --especially
with the cartoons.
>>DUFF: Absolutely.
Sometimes people see
geometric patterns--
>>REGINA: Yeah, that too.
>>DUFF: --or they
hear wild sounds
or have a sensation of swelling
up or being confined, going
down to the size of a pea.
>>REGINA: Hearing
your name called out.
>>DUFF: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Voices calling
your name out, very common.
>>DUFF: Very common.
And you know, I've talked to,
over the years as a counselor,
many people who've
lost loved ones,
and they will
often report having
an encounter with that
child or that parent
or that friend who's died
as they're falling asleep
or waking up in those
in-between worlds.
So I think it's very common for
more to pass into our awareness
than does normally in
our conscious going
about our business.
>>REGINA: Rigid conscious--
>>DUFF: Right.
>>REGINA: --left half
of the brain aspect.
>>DUFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: OK.
So while we're talking
about this crossover state
and you'd mentioned
sleepwalking,
that's a good time.
We were going to show it
later, but let's go ahead
and take a look at this
little video of this guy who
is being shown a video
of himself sleepwalking.
He looks like a zombie.
>>DUFF: Poor guy.
>>REGINA: Just for fun.
OK.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-What?
I look like some drunk guy.
Are you serious?
Come on.
How can I be walking down
the steps if I'm sleeping?
Seriously, how am I talking?
What?
What the hell?
[MUMBLING]
I'm surprised I didn't
fall down the steps.
-I am, too.
-There you are right
there with the baby.
-Mm-hmm.
-Is that you?
-See what you--
-Did I even see you?
-I don't know.
-Oh.
So did you find it?
-Find what?
-I had the tooth on.
Find what?
-I put it there because
it came out last night.
-What?
-Your tooth?
-Tooth?
-You're the Tooth Fairy.
-My teeth didn't come out.
-I don't know.
-You look like the Tooth Fairy.
-What the hell? [CHUCKLES]
Are you serious?
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>REGINA: So what did you
learn in your research
about that particular
practice that
happens with some
people in sleep?
>>DUFF: Yeah.
That's actually when
we're in our deepest
sleep is when
sleepwalking occurs.
And it can be
dangerous, actually.
>>REGINA: Oh, you bet.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
People can hop in cars.
>>REGINA: I'm surprised--
>>DUFF: I'm surprised he
didn't fall down those stairs.
I know.
Although sometimes
it's very innocuous.
I have a friend who
oftentimes wakes up,
and there's all these little
cracker crumbs in her bed.
And she realizes she's
gone and gotten crackers
from the kitchen and eaten
them all in the night.
And people have been known
to empty their refrigerators,
to do compulsive
eating in their sleep.
And unfortunately,
it's more common
when people take sleep aids,
and that's specifically
sleep medications, or if they
aren't getting enough sleep
or they're sleep-deprived
in some way.
That's when it's
more likely to occur.
>>REGINA: What are some of
the wildest things that you've
read about in your research that
people do while they're asleep?
>>DUFF: Gosh.
>>REGINA: It's just shocking
>>DUFF: The things
reported in the dream.
People have hopped in cars
and gone to do errands
and gotten in accidents
and gotten out of the car
and peed in the middle of the
street and told off the officer
and never woken up
during the whole thing.
>>REGINA: Seriously?
>>DUFF: Actually, it is
a defense in court now,
Ambien especially.
>>REGINA: Ambien?
>>DUFF: Yeah, especially,
although I think probably some
of the other sleep medications--
>>REGINA: Like the
Ambien defense?
>>DUFF: --do foster that.
Yes.
Yeah, absolutely.
Ambien zombies is
what they call them.
>>REGINA: Well,
we're going to talk
about these classifications
of drugs a little later on,
from when they first
started and what they do.
And we could talk a little bit
more-- I love Salvador Dali.
Some of the images, like
the bizarre cartoons
I watch, these cartoon
characters animated,
that's where Salvador Dali
got a lot of his inspiration--
>>DUFF: A lot of his imagery.
>>REGINA: --and his imagery.
>>DUFF: Mm-hmm.
And he said eating sea
urchins was the best
for fostering those, if you--
>>REGINA: Eating sea urchins.
>>DUFF: --want to try it.
Yes.
>>REGINA: It sounds like it
would be incredibly toxic.
I don't know about that.
>>DUFF: At this point, maybe.
>>REGINA: Yeah, at
this point maybe.
And then the famous
philosopher Swedenborg,
he said he went somewhere
between heaven and hell
during that time.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
He would travel out with the
planets and other universes
and back, yeah.
>>REGINA: So that
begs the question,
when we're in sleep-- first of
all, that's crossover sleep.
We're not in deep
sleep at that point.
>>DUFF: Yes.
Mm hmm.
>>REGINA: But it appears
that even at that time we
might be interfacing with
perhaps other dimensions
of reality and beings,
even in the lightest
states of crossover into sleep.
>>DUFF: I personally
think that's possible.
I've had experiences
along those lines,
and of course I've talked
to people who have.
It's not scientifically
recognized,
although there is
pretty good research
that we are more intuitive
in those mixed states
than at other times.
I think that's one of the
leading kind of frontiers
of scientific
research at this point
is the relationship
between consciousness
and consciousnesses.
>>REGINA: Yeah, because
it seems like that's also
a time when a lot of people
do their out-of-body travel.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
Yeah, absolutely.
>>REGINA: And they have
conscious awareness of it.
>>DUFF: Mm hmm.
Yes.
And lucid dreaming
as well is most
likely to be able to occur
when we're in those threshold
states, lucid
dreaming meaning we're
dreaming but we
know we're dreaming,
and so we can actually impact
the dream in some ways.
>>REGINA: So can we consciously
foster those states so that we
can then choose to have
these experiences we
want in this crossover place?
>>DUFF: We certainly
can foster those states.
And there are lots of good
books about lucid dreaming.
They have suggestions--
>>REGINA: And out-of-body
experiences as well.
>>DUFF: Out-of-body
experiences as well, yes.
I tend to take more of a-- I'm
less interested in controlling
my experiences than
I am in opening
and receiving and
learning from them.
So I tend to focus more on
just staying open and trying
to hold different levels of
awareness at the same time.
>>REGINA: Now we saw what
happens during sleepwalking.
What about sleep paralysis?
Because this is really
frightening to people.
>>DUFF: It is terrifying.
>>REGINA: If you
can talk about that,
talk about how it's dovetailing
with what's commonly
called the abduction experience
and so forth and just tell us
about this.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
Yeah.
Sleep paralysis is what
the scientists call it.
There are names for it in
just about every language
on the planet.
Every culture, every
time has described,
people have described having
experiences where they are
awake but they cannot
move their bodies.
They cannot cry out.
They don't have control over
their voluntary muscles.
And oftentimes it is
accompanied by the experience
of what feels to be a malevolent
spirit, although not always
malevolent, but a malevolent
spirit that feels like it's
jumped on your chest
and is suffocating you.
I remember once when I lived
in a collective household
my friend running into my room
in the middle of the night.
I've just escaped
this thing that
was trying to suffocate me.
She had just had
that experience.
Now scientifically what
appears to be happening
is that when we
have dreams there
is a mechanism in our
bodies that shuts down
our control of our
voluntary muscles.
Otherwise we would literally
be acting out all of our dreams
and running and
chasing and doing
all the things we
do in our dreams.
So it shuts down
that muscle control,
and the body relies on
the autonomic functions
of the heartbeat and breathing,
and shallow breathing
and so on.
>>REGINA: But normally you would
have no awareness at this time.
>>DUFF: Of course,
because normally you'd--
>>REGINA: You'd be in
a deep, deep sleep.
>>DUFF: --be sleeping, yes.
Uh huh.
So what happens
with sleep paralysis
is that we are consciously
awake and aware,
but that mechanism has
shut down the muscles.
Now what is curious to me
is that throughout the ages
and across many,
many cultures there
have been descriptions of
these malevolent spirits.
>>REGINA: That
come in the night.
>>DUFF: That come
at these times.
And that's why
they're so terrifying.
I have had the
experience of not being
able to move or cry out or speak
when I'm waking up from sleep,
but it wasn't
terrifying because there
was no malevolent
spirit with it.
It was just kind of like let
me wait till I can actually
move and speak,
and it came along.
So there are a couple
ways to understand that.
A scientific perspective
would suggest--
and evolutionary
biologists have proposed
this as a possibility--
that we are neurologically
wired to assume, in a state of
alarm, that there is a threat
and to kind of embellish
that threat in order
to be able to respond
as quickly as we can.
So it may be that we
hallucinate that to match
the level of terror we feel.
And it may be a neurological
mechanism left over
from our evolutionary past
when it was of benefit to be
able to respond quickly
to an alarming--
>>REGINA: A threat.
>>DUFF: --situation.
Yeah.
It's also possible that we
are, in these mixed states,
more vulnerable to spirits.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Because if you look at the work
of Dr. John Mack, for example,
very common where it
didn't matter where
the person was from,
anything about them.
It didn't matter if
this group of people
had nothing in common.
The experiences they seemed to
have in that place of paralysis
was either a time shift
to another reality
or being with alien species.
>>DUFF: Right.
>>REGINA: And they kept having
the same kind of hallmark
experiences, same kind
of places they'd go to.
So you have to-- certainly it's
worth considering that that
is--
>>DUFF: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: --a reality as well.
>>DUFF: That it's
very possible, yes.
But our Western
scientific tradition
refuses the
possibility that there
could be spirits or entities,
and so that's kept out.
But it's one reason why there
is a common cultural tradition
throughout the world in
different cultures of not
abruptly waking up
someone who's sleeping,
of not waking them sharply.
Because the notion is
that their spirits travel,
our spirits travel
when we sleep,
and they need to come
back into our bodies.
And if we wake up
someone too fast,
they can be
disorganized and have
a hard time bringing
themselves back.
>>REGINA: I wonder about that.
What about a society that needs
to be awakened by an alarm
clock because our institutions
start everyone so early
in the day, including
little children?
What is that doing
to us en masse
to have this shock of waking up?
I'm asking you that question.
And I will add a comment
that personally when
I'm awakened sharply and I'm
not back into the body yet,
the rest of the day is ruined.
I'm sluggish, disoriented.
>>DUFF: It's like
they say getting out
of the wrong side of the bed.
It forces you to get out of
the wrong side of the bed--
>>REGINA: But there are people--
>>DUFF: --and it's
hard to get back.
>>REGINA: --that live
like that every day.
>>DUFF: Every day, I know.
I know.
And it also robs us of
what sleep is offering us,
not in the sense of the
physiological renewal, which
does happen when we sleep.
But when we are shaken out of
our sleep, we don't get to rise
and mingle with the
sleep experiences
and the daytime experiences.
They don't get to
dialogue in a sense.
And we're not going to
remember our dreams usually
if we're woken suddenly.
So in a sense, we're stolen
from our night lives that way.
>>REGINA: You talk about
in these states of sleep--
we know what REM is,
but talk about REM--
but also you talk about
slow wave, a slow wave
time of sleep.
I hadn't heard about that
before reading your book.
What are these different states?
>>DUFF: Scientists have
identified several stages
of sleep based on the
EEG brain wave patterns.
But the two basic ones
are deep slow wave sleep
that tends to dominate the
first few hours of our sleep,
and that's the most
physically restorative.
That's when the growth
hormone is released.
That's what keeps
our skin elastic.
That's what keeps our muscles
strong, keeps our memories
good, that kind of thing.
And then there is at the other
extreme a very light sleep--
it's called Rapid Eye
Movement-- when we're
most likely to dream,
although it's not
the only time we dream.
And that's when the
brain is very active.
And one of the
interesting things
I found out in writing
and working on this book
is that Eastern philosophic
traditions-- Hindu, Buddhist,
even Taoist and
Sufi traditions--
have studied sleep and
identified these stages
for millennia, for thousands
and thousands of years.
And from that
Eastern perspective,
deep sleep is the most
sought after state of mind.
That's when we release
our egos and we release
our notions of what is and we
merge with the whole of things
from that Eastern perspective.
And so they would say we are
most deluded when we are awake
and convincing ourselves
that this is a table,
this is a wall, everything we've
identified what it is and we've
named it and labeled it and
have our attitudes about it.
We are a little less deluded
from that perspective
when we are dreaming.
We allow a little
more flexibility
in our world and
our experiences.
And we are the
most clear, we are
closest with what the Buddhists
would call the clear light
mind when we are
in that deep sleep.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And many things disturb that.
>>DUFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: For example,
you write in the book
about the introduction
of the coffee houses
to London in the
1700s where that's
where it started becoming
mind was more important.
Sharing ideas and invention
was more important.
And there was no time for sleep.
And so let's look at some of the
things like coffee and caffeine
that disturb the sleep
so we may not even
find ourselves gravitating
into that slow wave sleep.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
Yeah.
They called it with the
rise of the Enlightenment.
And it was that focus
on light as opposed
to darkness, that focus
on daytime as opposed
to nighttime, which
was then demonized.
Then with
industrialization we have
people being required
to work out of the home.
So then their sleep has to
consolidate into one time
at night, because
they're spending
long times out of the house.
Then artificial
light came along,
and that had us awake more
at night and sleeping less.
And then we came along, the
Computer Age with our LED
screens, and those produce a lot
of the blue waves that actually
tell our eyes and
our pineal glands
that we are to be awake now.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DUFF: They are awakening.
>>REGINA: So when you're
reading your email before you
go to bed at night,
bad idea, huh?
>>DUFF: Absolutely.
Or playing Solitaire, one of
my favorites on the computer,
or doing that shopping.
You know how hours
can go by at night
when you're on that-- that's
because those blue frequency
lights are telling your body
and your brain to stay awake.
>>REGINA: And so you're going
to have more difficulty going
into that slow wave state.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
Now a good time to do
those things, of course,
is the morning.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DUFF: And also to get out in
the sunlight in the morning.
And that helps set
our circadian cycles
to be awake when
we want to be awake
and then later on
to be able to sleep.
>>REGINA: There
are cultures that--
and I love this part of the
book-- that sleep together.
People sleep more in groups.
And they actually
consider it a crime
to leave a child by itself,
a baby in particular.
Talk to us about this.
>>DUFF: I was so interested
to find out about that.
There are some
age-old practices that
are nearly universal in
preindustrial cultures
or non-Westernized
cultures, really.
Because even in Western
fully industrialized cultures
in Asia-- for example,
Korea and Japan and China--
they wouldn't dream of putting
an infant in another room.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DUFF: And it's become
controversial now,
because it's called co-sleeping
and people sharing a mattress.
It doesn't have to be that.
But historically and in terms
of evolution, the pattern
has been for infants to sleep
very close to their caregivers,
within arm's reach.
And in fact, because
we evolved to a point
where we stood
upright, we needed
to have more narrow
pelvises, which
means that our babies
needed to be born sooner,
which means that
human infants do
a lot of their neurological
development after they're born.
And how that neurological
development occurs
is in contact with
their caregivers.
That's how they learn to
manage their breathing,
manage their autonomic arousal,
manage their-- learn how
to sleep.
And when they don't--
Even body temperature,
all those autonomic functions
are neurologically developed
after we're born in contact with
someone for whom those patterns
are well-established
neurologically.
So for many cultures, when
they would ask the mothers
or parents why do you
sleep with your babies,
they would have their reasons.
So they will be good children.
So we can care for them.
So we can respond
quickly to their needs.
It wasn't until,
really, the modern age
that it became a sign of
wealth to have more rooms,
and there became this attitude
in the Euro-American traditions
that it spoiled the baby to
respond quickly to their needs.
And so it became a practice
to try to separate, especially
mother and child, as
quickly as possible.
And that has become quite
problematic at this point.
>>REGINA: Well, yes.
We've all either been
party to or witnessed
this aspect of our culture.
Yet it feels wrong.
With almost every
mother it feels wrong.
>>DUFF: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And yet the parents or
the pediatrician or the husband
or someone will say, no,
just leave them in their room
and let them cry it out.
A tiny little baby
who just emerged
from a very safe,
enclosed environment
into this vast, cold world--
>>DUFF: Emptiness.
>>REGINA: --to leave
them alone by themselves,
I would like you to talk about
what the studies are showing
now in terms of what
happens to the development
of these little human beings.
>>DUFF: There is no
other animal that
ignores the cries
of their young.
>>REGINA: We're pack--
And we are pack animals.
>>DUFF: We are, absolutely.
And as you say, it is not
our instinct to ignore.
It is a very
stressful experience
for infant and caregiver to
ignore distress vocalizations,
as they're called.
And our cortisol, our
stress hormones rage
when that happens in both
the parent and the child.
If you leave that child,
that infant to cry it out--
and they will at some point cry
it out when they realize that
they are, in effect, abandoned--
>>REGINA: Yeah.
You'll become fatigued and
stop through shared fatigue.
>>DUFF: Right.
Uh huh.
>>REGINA: That doesn't
mean they're calm.
>>DUFF: Right.
And when they've actually
looked at the stress hormones,
once the baby stops crying,
the mother's stress hormones
go right back down
again and she feels OK.
Baby's OK.
I'm OK.
Baby's stress
hormones stay high.
And when you have
high stress hormones
consistently, that
actually inhibits
neurological development,
so it becomes
quite problematic at that point.
Now obviously it's not a
black or white situation.
I know many parents who have
let their baby cry it out,
and the babies
are not destroyed.
But the need to respond
to distress vocalizations
is important.
And now even the parenting
experts who used to say
let them cry it out, you've
got to get your sleep will now
say go in and talk to
that child at least.
At the very least, let that
child know your presence.
They need to hear
and sense in some way
your presence in order to be
able to literally calm down
and in order to develop the
capacity to, what they say,
self-soothe, which is what we're
learning to do neurologically
when we get all worked up.
You know how a baby
when they get worked up,
they can't calm
themselves back down.
They just can't.
They need that parent to
rock them and talk to them
and sing and do those
things to calm them down.
And that's what needs
to happen, yeah.
>>REGINA: In a lot of
cultures, the children
sleep either with or
right next to the parents
up to the age of, say, five.
>>DUFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: That's pretty
common in a lot of cultures.
>>DUFF: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: And let's talk about
the hallmark of socialization,
of community and behavioral
development in that.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
Yeah.
There have been some
interesting studies.
Now they do have their
flaws, because you
can't in good conscience
give a child a cry
it out method and the not.
>>REGINA: No.
>>DUFF: But they have done
studies where they looked
at children who were-- who
slept right near their parents
for the first five years
of life, for example,
and then looked at them as
adults and compared them with
those who didn't.
And what they found is that they
were more cooperative, more--
less anxious, less depressed,
more satisfied with life.
Which I find very--
now the reason
that they have their
flaws is because there
are a lot of other
factors besides sleep
that impacted those people's
lives as they were growing up
that we had no control over.
But if we were to
characterize the Northern
European or European and
American cultures that
have been the most imperialist
cultures historically
on this planet,
we would describe
those very same qualities--
anxious, depressed, aggressive,
those qualities.
And so I think the ways
in which we sleep have,
as those Balinese mothers and
Japanese mothers have said,
we stay close to our baby
so they will be cooperative,
so they will get
along with others.
>>REGINA: It just makes sense.
>>DUFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: I never
could ignore a cry.
No.
And I tried to keep my son right
next-- his little bassinet was
right here anyway.
I never wanted to
be far from him.
>>DUFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: And he was so
mellow, such an easy person.
We were joking before the show.
I feel like I got a
pass on motherhood
because he was so easy.
But there was always that
very close proximity also.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
And when you look at
the American tradition,
the trundle bed was
literally for the baby.
So they would just pull out the
bad and be right next to it.
And then it used to
be-- the nursery used
to be just a corner of
the parents' bedroom.
It wasn't a separate room.
>>REGINA: Right.
That's right.
>>DUFF: It was just
a little corner.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
It breaks my heart to think
of a little child lying there
crying in the dark
by themselves.
Ugh.
>>DUFF: And the
idea was that, oh,
we'll make them
more independent.
Well, in fact, the
studies suggest--
>>REGINA: Make them neurotic.
>>DUFF: Yes, more neurotic.
>>REGINA: And fearful.
>>DUFF: Mm hmm.
>>REGINA: And feeling
like life isn't safe.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: Not good.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
>>REGINA: OK.
Let's move on to the subject of
dreams, including bad dreams,
because you have an
interesting take on that
that the research
showed you that this
might be a practice of sorts.
>>DUFF: Well, yes.
Scientists have
often wondered why
we sleep and then, of
course, why we dream.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>DUFF: And one of the
prevailing theories
at this point-- evolutionary
neurologists have posed
it-- is that we dream in
order to practice our survival
strategies, which makes
sense with a lot of the kind
of anxiety dreams we have,
or running to catch the bus,
trying to get to the class on
time, remembering our shoes
when we, you know.
All the things
that we have to do,
we're practicing, in a sense.
And people who play soccer a
lot play soccer in their dreams
or play the piano
in their dreams.
And the other thing
that reinforces
that notion is that infants,
who sleep a lot of the day,
spend a lot of that time in
dream sleep, in REM sleep.
And it's understood
that we are actually
developing our neurological
structures in REM sleep.
So when we are
practicing things,
we're actually kind of laying
the network for that skill
that we're practicing.
>>REGINA: What about the
recurring dreams that we have?
>>DUFF: Oh, they
are so fascinating.
And you can look at them from a
lot of different perspectives.
I have kept track of my
dreams for decades now.
And in the book, I didn't take
any one perspective on it,
because I find that you can go
into a Jungian point of view
and get a lot out
of that and you
can go into an
evolutionary point of view
and get a lot out
of that, and you
can go into you know, a lot
of different-- a spiritualist
point of view, a lot of
different perspectives
and get a lot from our dreams.
But one thing that is also clear
is that our dreams access a lot
more information than we have
consciously aware-- in touch
with during the daytime.
Oliver Sacks talks about-- he's
the famous neurologist who's
written about various
kinds of people
with different
kinds of disorders--
and he's noted that oftentimes
his patients have dreamt
about their disorder
before it developed.
They dreamt that
they were frozen
before they developed
catatonia, for example.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>DUFF: And, gosh, Galen, a
lot of the ancient physicians
in the East and the
West turned to dreams
to help with diagnosis and
also with help with treatment,
because our dreams
can access a lot more
of what's going
on in our bodies.
And a lot, I suspect, more
familial and ancestral
information and
evolutionary information
is available as well.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
There was one reoccurring
dream I had for many years
that had to do with
being in a vehicle,
starting at three years old.
I was born and lived
in San Francisco.
And starting at three years
old, I'd be in the backseat,
there would be no driver, and
it would be careening down
Van Ness Avenue toward
the ocean, right?
>>DUFF: Yeah.
>>REGINA: And of course,
before you splash into the sea,
you wake up.
>>DUFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: And then
as the years went on,
it became whatever it was.
Then I got my driver's
license, and then I
would be responsible
for driving people.
It went on and on until finally,
which it broke that dream
sequence permanently,
I was in Berkeley
in the hills of Berkeley,
which some of them
are extremely steep, like in
San Francisco, and in this dream
it was like a Wayne
Thiebaud painting.
>>DUFF: Oh.
>>REGINA: The streets
were like this.
>>DUFF: Yes, yes.
>>REGINA: And I was driving
this car and came to a point
on the hill that was the
crest, and if you made it over,
you lived.
But in order to
make it over, you
had to go on a road that
curved back on itself so it
defied gravity and then
go around an over the top.
>>DUFF: Wow.
>>REGINA: And I watched
a red Corvette do it.
Some guy was driving
a red Corvette.
And my passenger's
like, don't do this.
>>DUFF: Oh.
>>REGINA: And I said,
no, I just saw it.
If he can do it, it can be done.
I can do this.
And so there was obviously
some very deep process
of practice and
strengthening maybe qualities
of belief in self and so forth.
And I did it.
So I gunned it, and I said,
hang on, we can do it.
And we just barely crested
over and made it in.
And it ended--
>>DUFF: And that was the end.
>>REGINA: --that
sequence of dreams.
I haven't had once since.
And that was a lifelong thing.
>>DUFF: Isn't that interesting.
>>REGINA: And so that,
to me, was an example
of practicing our
whatever, our proficiency,
our confidence in life.
>>DUFF: Mm hmm.
That's an excellent example.
I know the driver
today was telling me
about a dream he had once in
which Boulder Creek turned
direction, turned
around and went back up.
And I was asking about
that time in his life.
And he said, yes, that was a
time of big changes in my life
where I really had to
turn everything around.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>DUFF: And in the book, I
talk about Lyndon Johnson had
a recurring dream over the
course of his lifetime.
>>REGINA: That's right.
Share that with us.
>>DUFF: From childhood
through his presidency.
It wouldn't come often,
but it was a nightmare
that would return where
he was in some way
or another unable to move
or to get where he needed
to go, whether he was tied
to a chair in the middle
of a pasture and the
cows were charging in
or whether he was trying
to swim across the river
and couldn't make it and was
just swimming in circles.
And he told his biographer
Doris Kearns about these dreams.
They were that important to him.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>DUFF: And the
last one occurred--
I believe it was the
swimming in circles one--
and he woke up from
that one, and that's
when he decided that we
needed to get out of Vietnam.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
I thought that was
absolutely fascinating.
And more than we
know, these dreams
are influencing
very large decisions
that are happening
around the planet.
>>DUFF: Absolutely.
Absolutely.
And it was just a
short while ago--
and I forget which president
it was-- it was a 20th century
president who had a dream
that there was a major plane
crash at a Maryland airport
that was very small.
And he woke up and he went
to Congress, and he said,
I had this dream.
We need to fix this
airport and make it safer.
And Congress right away
gave him the money,
and they went and
fixed the airport.
Can you imagine that
happening nowadays?
>>REGINA: No,
unfortunately I can't.
I remember having
one of those dreams--
and I want to talk about
this-- these collective dreams.
It was probably
15 or 20 years ago
where I dreamt that a missile
was shot off and then crashed.
And it crashed the next
morning when they shot one off
from Vandenberg Air Force Base.
And that kind of thing,
that collective dreaming,
happened in spades
around events like 9/11.
>>DUFF: Yes.
Yes.
>>REGINA: Can you
talk about what's
happening in these
collective dreams?
>>DUFF: You know, I'm not
sure what's happening,
except that they
are very common.
And it does make you question
our notion of time as linear,
that there's a before
and a now and an after.
Because when we have
precognitive dreams--
and every system of
dream interpretation
has always acknowledged
that sometimes there
are precognitive
dreams-- we have
to somehow realize
that dreaming taps
into a reality in which
time is more fluid.
>>REGINA: And that
brings big questions up.
If you're tapping in
collectively to an event
before it's occurred, it
brings the whole notion
of our time/space continuum--
>>DUFF: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: --into question.
>>DUFF: Mm hmm.
>>REGINA: And what
is predetermined,
for example, versus what are
we responding to because we can
feel the frequencies
in motion and all that?
It brings up a lot
of larger questions.
>>DUFF: And people have pondered
those questions forever,
even in the Western tradition.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>DUFF: One of my favorite--
or, the first dream
encyclopedia was
written a few thousand years
ago by a man named Artemidorus.
And he traveled all
over the Mideast talking
to all kinds of
soothsayers and dreamers
from a lot of
different traditions.
It was at a time when
the East and the West
were much more mingled than
they are or have been recently.
And he really
tried to figure out
what was happening with
the precognitive dreams.
And he eventually had to
say that it was something
like-- is it that
the dream comes to us
and gives us this
information about the future
or is it that we
can imagine forward?
And it's some combination of the
two, a reflexive relationship
with the universe that occurs,
I think, in dreaming at times.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>DUFF: Mm hmm.
>>REGINA: You mentioned
at the very early part
of our conversation
that it used to be
very common before the
industrialized world
and before artificial light,
for example, for people
to go to bed when the
sun went down early
but to have two separate
segments of sleep per night.
Let's talk about
that gap in between.
>>DUFF: Oh, yes.
>>REGINA: Because I
think that's actually--
we don't give ourselves
permission, because we think,
oh my god, I woke up.
I'm having a hard time
getting back to sleep.
And we punish
ourselves and wait,
and of course time
passes very slowly then.
But in fact, let's talk about
the beauty of that gap time
when we're awake in the
middle of the night.
>>DUFF: In pre-modern
times, it was
called-- pre-modern
European worlds,
it was called the
watch or the vigil.
And people would get up in the
night and they'd write poetry.
They'd visit with each other.
They'd make some beer
or steal an apple
from the neighbor's
orchard, just
do things you can
do in the dark.
But now that we have
more awareness of what
happens in sleep,
that watch time
is very valuable,
because it comes
after most of our deep sleep,
most of that physically
restorative sleep and
before the dream sleep.
And it's really a time
outside of time almost.
And many artists and
writers will talk about it.
A lot of poets will talk about
this is their magic hour.
This is when
inspiration can come.
This is when there are
not the bright lights
to blind us to the
currents that can occur,
the ways in which we can open to
the natural world, in a sense.
One of the things I realized
as I was working on this
is that sleep is perhaps the
most intimate way in which we
experience the natural
world, in which we
are participating in nature.
Because every cell, every
creature, every plant,
every animal, everything
on this planet
that rotates every 24
hours has a circadian cycle
and these alternating cycles
of light and dark and rest
and activity.
And we as human
beings, we lie down
to return to that earthly
nature that we belong to
and that we are one with
in that sense at that time.
>>REGINA: Well, I
have-- especially
since reading your book,
it definitely impressed me
that that time where you
might wake up a few hours,
three or four hours
into your sleep,
is actually-- I have
always enjoyed that time,
but I would always try to
hurry and get back to sleep.
And now I think just to
spend more time in that zone
where we have no
obligation, there's
no light, it's our
own little world,
that we can do anything
we wish with in our minds
and drift between
worlds, and so that's
a valid way to-- that was
always a valid way to sleep,
it sounds like.
>>DUFF: Yeah, absolutely.
And it wasn't until
very recent decades
that it began to be defined as a
kind of insomnia, as a problem.
And it's called the middle of
the night insomnia or sleep
maintenance insomnia.
There's various names
for it in sleep medicine.
It is the most commonly
reported kind of insomnia.
>>REGINA: Because it's
natural to us to wake up.
>>DUFF: Absolutely.
That's what we're
beginning to realize
is that we have these
natural rhythms of resting
and being more
awake and that that
happens through the
night as well as the day.
And so it is that natural rhythm
breaking through, absolutely.
And really what it is
is it's not a problem
unless our daily lives
have commandeered too many
of the hours of our day.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>DUFF: And the problem is what
we demand of ourselves by day.
That's what's created
sleep problems.
It's not that we don't
know how to sleep.
It's that we are drinking all
that caffeine, that we are--
>>REGINA: Trying to squeeze
more out of ourselves.
>>DUFF: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>DUFF: And trying
to compress that
sleep into shorter
and shorter times
and expecting to fall right
asleep and wake up right away
and never wake up in between.
And that's just
really unnatural.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about the ways
in which we force
ourselves into sleep.
And it started out with, I
think you said, chloral hydrate.
>>DUFF: Yes.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about
the lineage of the drugs.
>>DUFF: Oh, gosh.
And there have been quite a few.
And yeah, the famous
Mickey that could
be slipped in someone's drink.
And in fact, all the famous
Mickeys or rape drugs
were initially developed
for sleep medication--
>>REGINA: Interesting.
>>DUFF: --to this day.
And what became eventually
in the second half
of the 20th century
the strongest one
was the benzodiazepines.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Talk about the characteristics--
you're talking Valium?
>>DUFF: Yeah.
Benzodiazepine's also--
>>REGINA: Xanax.
>>DUFF: --Klonopin,
all those, yes.
>>REGINA: And what do those do?
>>DUFF: They add an
average of 11 minutes
to our sleep at night.
That's what studies
have revealed.
>>REGINA: That's it?
>>DUFF: That's it.
>>REGINA: People take that
stuff for 11 extra minutes?
>>DUFF: However, they
also-- people will
wake feeling like they had
better sleep because they
reduce anxiety.
We fall asleep quicker.
And they induce amnesia
so we don't remember
the tossing and
turning in the night.
At the same time,
they reduce the time
you spend in deep
sleep, which is
that physically
restorative sleep.
That's so important for our
immunity and our well-being.
And it also reduces
REM sleep, which
is so emotionally restorative.
A lot of that dreaming is
working out our problems.
>>REGINA: So any deep sleep
is really kind of knocked
out when you're on those drugs.
>>DUFF: Yeah, you
have less of it.
>>REGINA: You have less of it.
>>DUFF: And as we age we
get less and less deep sleep
in general, which is why
we show signs of aging,
everything from wrinkled skin to
weakened muscle, memory lapse.
All of it is a function of
getting less deep sleep.
So if someone is chronically
every night taking
a benzodiazepine or
a non-benzodiazepine,
both of them have this
effect of reducing
the time in the deep sleep.
>>REGINA: What are
non-- That's Ambien.
>>DUFF: Yeah.
>>REGINA: Non-benzodiazepine.
>>DUFF: That would be like
Ambien and Lunesta and those,
the non-benzodiazepines.
They are not as addictive
as the benzodiazepines,
although there are
many people who say,
and I know many people who
say, I cannot sleep without
my Ambien or my Lunesta.
So there is some level of
accommodation at least.
But when it reduces
that time in deep sleep,
it's actually sort of
accelerating our aging.
And the long-term
mortality studies
suggest that it actually
shortens the life span as well.
>>REGINA: What about
antihistamines?
Benadryl?
That's a famous one.
>>DUFF: It is.
>>REGINA: Over-the-counter
stuff, like Unisom--
>>DUFF: Yeah.
>>REGINA: --what happens when
you're taking antihistamines?
>>DUFF: I'm not as familiar
with the antihistamines,
because they aren't
as commonly used.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>DUFF: And one of
the things that I
want to make a point of
in talking about this
is that I can totally empathize
with people's desire to sleep.
And we read so much about
the deleterious effects
of not getting enough sleep that
I understand why people would
turn to any kind of sleep aid.
And also there are
times in our lives
when we are traumatized, when
we've had a grievous loss, when
there's a real need for
something to help us to sleep,
and I'm not putting
down those things.
It's just that these studies
have indicated for decades now
that the best way
to get better sleep
is to simply arrange your
life around your sleep
a little better more.
>>REGINA: Don't read those
emails late at night.
>>DUFF: Yes, absolutely.
Make sure it's cool
enough but not too cold.
Make sure it's dark enough.
Make sure it's-- Just
hold it as important.
I can't tell you how
many people who've
read the book have
said to me, you
don't give any advice
about how to sleep,
but I'm sleeping
so much better now.
>>REGINA: Oh,
that's interesting.
Because you talk about--
>>DUFF: Because they're
paying attention to it.
>>REGINA: --the lifestyle.
Yes, yes.
>>DUFF: They're
paying attention.
Attention is so powerful.
Just by attending to something,
we allow it to thrive.
>>REGINA: And
finally, you say you
wonder what it would be like
if we really could truly
walk between those waking and
sleeping world with awareness
all the time.
>>DUFF: Oh, yes.
I do wonder that.
And I wonder what
sleep would have
to say about our day lives.
We from our day life perspective
have a lot to say about sleep,
but what would
sleep say about us?
And I think that sleep would say
that fortunately they're around
every night to help repair
the damage we create by day.
>>REGINA: We create by day.
So we need to start
respecting that.
We need to stop buying into the
whole Western way of thinking
you snooze, you
lose, the early bird
gets the worm, and so forth.
>>DUFF: All of those.
>>REGINA: We're already seeing--
>>DUFF: The best don't rest.
>>REGINA: --the best don't
rest-- the destructive elements
of that way of living
in our culture at large.
And it sounds like
honoring sleep
might be one of the
quickest paths to reversing
a lot of that damage
collectively and individually?
>>DUFF: Absolutely.
The carbon footprint
of sleep is very small.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
Kat, thank you so much
for all of your hard work
and sharing this with us.
>>DUFF: Thank you
very much, Regina.
>>REGINA: Again, the
title of the book
is "The Secret Life
of Sleep," which
is available through
all major booksellers.
And meanwhile, you might
also enjoy my interview
with Robert Moss on dreaming
here in the Gaiam Archives.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.